what is a column store slotted page?
    stores (tuple, attr_val) or (PK, attr_val)

How do access methods work with diff pages?
    slots not necesarily same as row store slotted page
    slots could be based on index such as first slot is < x 
    next slot is < x and < y etc

    index on attribute but compare on PK if necessary
    can point to start of "USA"

    intensity is hashed file w hash access 
    but needs a b+ tree for range queries

block vs page? 
    same thing

what is a row vs column operation?
    row operations needs to be done on entire record
    build record in column buffer, then send it to the row buffer

Why is there two differnt buffers?
    used to take advatnge of different workloads

Have a catalog that stores indexes
catalog can store size of records and tuples in files
B emode:
    0 = begin new process?
    1 = begin new transaction: makes sense
R read
I insert
U update
T table scan
M retrieve coffee names of coffees with country of origin
G count based on val intensity 
    ie # of coffees with intensity > x
    b+ tree
    

how to store different tables?
    have a database.
    each attribute in a database is a file which is a collection of pages in columnar store
    each page has tuples stored in some way (heap, ordered, cluster)
    each table is stored seperately

What does the access method tell us?
    which page and where in the page?
    or just the page?
        to find the value depends on file organization 

Should we have multiple access methods for intensity?
    need an ordered one on intensity and one on coffeeIDs

Who does the operations?
    data manager does the operations then, just returns the result
    no need for a result page frame

How to do table scan?
    you need all the pages
    how to get all the coffeeIDs
        
    what to do if more pages than buffer pages?
        batch the page requests
            one results buffer page and then continually read/flush pages to create result
            can deterministically determine # of batches with tuple size

How to do M?
    table attr_val
    search country of origin for attr_val
        get those pages, put pages in buffer
        now get the list of those coffeeIDs
        search Name atrtibute file for coffeeIDs
        get those pages into the buffer
        then create list of the names

When flushing have to convert all the row buffer pages to column store 
    can write to disc from the Row buffer for flush()
        panos said so
        but this requires more work as you need to check the column buffer for conflicts
        then need to convert the record to tuples and distribute to the different attributes
        
        the other way is to just put the tuples into the column buffer
            maybe if page isnt in buffer can directly flush it
     
Need to pull pages to col buffer then create record then propagate to the row buffer

can have data structure to know which records are in the row buffer

buffer size minimum of 2

row buffer is constant stream of appending tuples
    keep track of each index of the row buffer

can save data structures of binary files
    need to load on restart

Could keep track of the counts of intensity
    metadata of selection factor
    when update, change vlaues decrement and increment
    intensity is 0-12 (hw2)
    this speeds up G operation

Can store the opposite operations or can store the old values or new values
    and just replace on abort
        insert turns into a delete
        update turns into an update of old value
    brian thinks storing the new values is the most work



